Hailing from the Age of Realism, Leo Tolstoy’s The Death of Ivan Ilyich portrays the depressing life of a Russian judge during the late 19th century. Through a majority of the novel, the protagonist suffers from an illness which slowly leads him closer to his death, causing him to come to the disheartening realization that he was only happy during his early childhood years (Blasdel 4). Nonetheless, despite his trials and tribulations, the main character finds solace during his final moments, allowing him to embrace death. Using the events leading to the death of Ivan Ilyich, Tolstoy offers insight on the selection of life purpose, arguing that people have the power to choose their own, individual purposes for life and suggesting that they should find purposes which they share with other human beings.
Tolstoy’s examination of finding purpose in life begins with the breakdown of his main character’s initial life goal. Ivan Ilyich begins the novel with a definitive objective: a life involving strict adherence to social standards. This goal might seem innately boring to some people, though the purpose could be appealing to others, which begs the question why do people find it necessary to have a purpose in life? A purpose for life is the largest goal; it provides the grounds through which maximum possible contentment is achieved. Humans seek that which is pleasurable and run from situations which usher in negative emotions; in this way, a person’s purpose in life is the path which he or she believes will yield contentment in life. Ivan Ilyich endeavors most of his life to fit into society. He checks off all the boxes on the socially respectable life list, including but not limited to owning a nice house, holding a respectable job, and have a wife with children. By the standards of society in which he lives, he has achieved a successful, meaningful life and fulfilled his purpose. Nonetheless, as he lies dying and reflecting on his life, the protagonist faces significant mental turmoil. He sees his life and lives of those around him as fake and non-unique. He sees falsehoods in the tenets of life which he once prized himself for upholding. His life purpose crumbles, no longer providing him contentment in his life.
Ultimately, it was the sickness that caused Ivan Ilyich to begin to reflect upon his life. If Ivan had not fallen ill, the likelihood of his discovering the falsehoods in his life becomes small. Still, because of his medical condition, the protagonist suffers before finding peace; is this death more favorable than the alternative, in which he dies due to natural causes without any true suffering? Following the method of death in which he never gets sick, Ivan could have continued to the end of his life following the purpose of living a socially respectable life, living contently until the end of his time. In this way, his purpose would have been successful; as defined previously, the purpose could have allowed him to live a content life until his death. Nonetheless, Tolstoy portrays the plight of Ivan because although the main character suffers significantly during the novel, he still reaches peace before he dies, a peace only which comes a high understanding of life. He has achieved a wisdom which makes him a more complete person because it allows him a deeper understanding of the human condition.
The death of Ivan Ilyich as written by Tolstoy leads to a higher level of contentment than the proposed, alternative death where Ivan does not suffer from medical problems. The proposed method of termination for Ivan is a shallow purpose, not necessarily because it would not lead to contentment, but rather because the produced contentment crumbles when under pressure. On the other hand, the death as prescribed by Tolstoy requires more pain and hardship to achieve; however, because this path yields higher understanding of the human condition, it may not crack when placed under stress, thus more favorable.
A better understanding of the human condition leads to the ability to connect with the rest of humanity. Ivan’s grand realization comes through his interactions with Gerasim and his son (Blasdel 4). In one scene of the novel, during which Ivan is suffering on his deathbed, he asks Gerasim to elevate his legs, to the young butler obliges without any complaint, talking to his master in a calm and soothing voice (Tolstoy). “Gerasim transcends his social function as servant when he takes upon himself the additional, unpleasant duties of tending to the dying Ivan Ilyich” therefore connecting to Ivan as a human, not as a member of society (Blasdel 4). Ivan feels that his son is similar in that his son pities his father, not because society dictates that he should, but rather because he feels a legitimate human connection (Tolstoy). Only after these thoughts is Ivan able to accept death and the falsehoods of life, thus allowing himself to die in peace. Through Ivan’s passing, the author suggests that purpose be found in the rest of humanity. He says that truly connecting to other humans provides solace from the evils of the world. Right before he dies, “[Ivan] is sorry for [family and friends] and wants to end their suffering” (Blasdel 7). He changes his life purpose to releasing his friends and family from their duties to him; his new purpose is helping other human beings. Taking this a step further, Tolstoy may be suggesting that people should select life purposes which they share with other human beings.
Tolstoy is not the first or last to suggest finding life purposes shared with other human beings. This idea exists in works both pre- and post- Age of Realism. For example, the concept appears in Goethe’s work The Sorrows of Young Werther. In the short novel, the purpose of the protagonist is clearly the marrying of his beloved Charlotte; nonetheless, by most societal standards, Werther’s purpose was detrimental to his existence because it caused his untimely death. Like Ivan’s initial purpose, the goal of marrying Charlotte would have worked for Werther if the object of his affection had returned his love; he could have lived happily ever after with the woman of his dreams. However, his purpose for life crumbles under pressure when Charlotte refuses to grant him his deepest desires. Werther falls because he was alone in his purpose; his goal of marriage could only be accomplished by himself, not through the help of others striving for the same purpose. Unlike Ivan, who finds solace in humanity before his death, Werther dies alone, separate from all others, as seen when no one visits his funeral. As such, Tolstoy’s argument to find a purpose shared with other human beings is validated through the depressing events of The Sorrows of Young Werther.
The main characters from Beckett’s Waiting for Godot also embrace this concept of finding a common purpose with others. The two waste their lives away “waiting for Godot,” a sign which will never come; nonetheless, the feeling of depression which The Sorrows of Young Werther are not present with the termination of this novel. Vladimir and Estragon can continue to life their pointless lives because they have each other. Consider the following excerpt from the play:
Estragon: We always find something, eh Didi, to give us the impression we exist? 
Vladimir: Yes, yes, we're magicians.” (Beckett)
The words “we” and “us” are important because it highlights their mutual purpose, which is waiting for Godot; thus, even though they have no hope for living a meaningful life, they will get through to the end through interactions with each other. In this way, their purpose is successful in yielding general contentment until they pass from the world.
This notion of finding a purpose common amongst a group of people even appears during the Enlightenment, such as in Candide. Voltaire terminates his novel with the idea of “cultivating the garden,” in which his characters develop a community working for a common purpose (137). It is only when the characters settle down in the garden that the severe ups and downs of their lives end because in this community, life becomes more tolerable because they are working amongst friends. (Moon 131) In this manner, even the work of this Enlightenment thinker coincides with the ideas expressed decades later by Tolstoy.
An important aspect of Ivan’s realization on his deathbed is his acceptance of the new wisdom. He chooses the purpose of accepting and connecting with the rest of humanity whereas it is likely that he didn’t choose to live by the standards of society. In this way, Tolstoy says to choose the purpose which most resonates with the soul and own this purpose. This message is kind of existential in nature in that only the individual can decide on and take responsibility for his or her own life goals. No one can define a life purpose for another person. Tolstoy offers some guidelines as to choosing a purpose for life, as does Voltaire, Goethe, and Beckett; however, each person has the ultimate power to choose for himself or herself.